But: given man as identical to science, as subject (of) science, what is the result for a science of man? Humanist imagery and man as transcendental Idiot Humanism is the set of philosophical images of man rather than the knowledge of man. Homo sive scientia: every man is non-thetic man (of) science before being man of logos. A science of man describes man in his dual-ity but does not thereby add a supplementary division, a new philosophical decision to the weight of divisions humanity bears. The science of man obliges us to take the word “object” in two senses without any measure in common: as inert given and as subject (of) science. The essence of man qua subject (of) science The question is not: what is man if…? What does the identity of man and science mean, an identity that is necessarily accompanied (without contradiction) by a double givenness of man? Inversely, a non-philosophical science of man is ungraspable in the horizon of Greco-ontological presuppositions: man thinks from his own depths (vision-in-man) without passing through the mediation of this horizon. the inalienable content) of man as subject (of the) science of man. Nothing—if not good will—distinguishes man’s perfecting from man’s destruction; and nothing—if not philosophical decision qua ultimate authority subjecting man—distinguishes good will from the pure will to power. This operation is the absolute condition of every humanism: with every man is associated or connected a philosopher as excellent and universal form of man. Even philosophical humanism as well as, for example, juridical and critical rationalism belong to science’s object rather than to science’s essence. Man is his own object without passing through the Other man or intersubjectivity (another form of submission to the universal). A science of man that respects the specificity and autonomy of its object can only imply the theoretical rejection of philosophical humanism. A human science of men instead rediscovers man’s power to transform philosophy. It’s not surprising that man has always been claimed by philosophy as its (if not ultimate, at least obligated) object, forbidding him from anything that ends with science. Everything of man that depends on philosophy, everything that is philosophizable in him belongs solely to the object, which requires a science that is non-philosophical by itself. This is why more-than-factum man (his essence) requires datum-man (reduced to the state of simple given for a science). Humanism is what the philosopher thinks of man, it is not what man thinks (of) himself. “The dual” is man himself, this “articulation”—this positive non-articulation—of the two givennesses of man. Duality of double givenness, which is not that of man’s being, but of man.
